

Erasmus University Rotterdam (abbreviated as EUR, Dutch: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam [eːˌrɑsmʏs ynivɛrsiˌtɛit rɔtərˈdɑm]) is a public research university located in Rotterdam, Netherlands. The university is named after Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus, a 15th-century Christian humanist and theologian.

Erasmus MC is the largest and one of the foremost academic medical centers and trauma centers in the Netherlands, whereas its economics and business school, Erasmus School of Economics and Rotterdam School of Management are well known in Europe.

Erasmus University Rotterdam was founded on 8 November 1913 as the Netherlands School of Commerce (Nederlandsche Handels-Hoogeschool, or NHH) through private initiative with broad support from the business community of Rotterdam.[5] In 1937, the school was recognized as a higher educational institute with university status, providing education in commerce and economics as an academic discipline. This resulted in a change of its name: the NHH became the NEH, or Netherlands School of Economics (Nederlandse Economische Hogeschool). The growing complexity of society led in the 1960s, to the arrival of the faculties of Law and Social Sciences, followed in later decades by Philosophy, History and Arts, and Business Administration.

From 1950, the Foundation for Higher Clinical Education used its best efforts to get a full academic medical study programme established in Rotterdam, and with success: In 1966, the government established the Medical Faculty Rotterdam (Medische Faculteit Rotterdam), housed next to Dijkzigt Hospital. Together with the Sophia Children's Hospital and the Daniel den Hoed Clinic, it forms the University Hospital Rotterdam, which as of 1 January 2003, bears the name Erasmus MC.
In 1973, the Medical Faculty Rotterdam and the Netherlands School of Economics merged, after which the institution was renamed under its current name Erasmus University Rotterdam (Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam) – the first university in the Netherlands named after a person, a man to whom Rotterdam owes the reputation it has held for centuries in the academic world.[6]

This domain includes the Erasmus MC, the Erasmus School of Health Policy and Management (ESHPM) and the Institute for Medical Technology Assessment (iMTA).

Erasmus MC is the new name for the university medical centre in Rotterdam, which is a merger of the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences and the University Hospital Rotterdam (Dijkzigt, Sophia, Daniel den Hoed clinic). The biomedical cluster plays a leading role in the field of analysis of role of individual genes playing role in diseases. The Forensic Molecular Biology department works together with the Netherlands Forensic Institute (NFI). Major long-term genetic epidemiological studies among the elderly and children are Erasmus Rotterdam Health for the Elderly (ERGO) and Generation R respectively.
The Erasmus School of Health Policy and Management (ESHPM) forms a bridge between medicine and the health sciences on the one hand and social sciences on the other. The institute for Medical Technology Assessment (iMTA) conducts health economic research in collaboration with both the Erasmus MC and the Erasmus School of Health Policy and Management.

This area includes the Erasmus School of Economics and the Rotterdam School of Management. Its economics programs and management programs attract students and postgraduates from all over the world.
The research schools Erasmus Institute for Management (ERIM) and the Tinbergen Institute attract PhD students, research fellows, PostDocs and visiting professors of repute from all corners of the world.
Other joint ventures are the English-language programme International Business Administration, the Erasmus Executive Development programme (EED) and the Erasmus University Centre for Contract Research and Business Support (ERBS).

The research focuses on the organisation of business and society. This area has ground in common not only with economics and management, but also with medicine and health sciences.

As one of four concentrations of Erasmus University, culture is defined broadly with focus on the areas of media, cultural economics, and the high arts. Primary research is on society and the arts, including cultural policy, media, and social identity in modern society. Faculty has particular strengths in research, and the students tend to graduate with strong research skills for both academic and field placement.

The Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM) is the joint research institute of the Rotterdam School of Management and the Erasmus School of Economics, both at Erasmus University Rotterdam. It aims to bring together top researchers in business and management.

Erasmus University today is seen as the leading university in Econometrics and Operational Research. Jan Tinbergen, Nobel Prize winner for Economics (1969), and Henri Theil founded the Econometric Institute and influenced both Econometrics & Management Science. Tinbergen's theories also had a political inclination, with multiple objectives of price stability and employment and policies to achieve the desired results and stabilizing the economy.

The Tinbergen Institute is a joint institute for research and education in economics, econometrics and finance of the University of Amsterdam, the VU University Amsterdam and the Erasmus University Rotterdam. It is one of the top research institutes and graduate schools in economics and finance in the world.[7] It offers a research master program (MPhil) in economics and finance as well as PhD opportunities.

In association with TU Delft, the TRAIL Research School is the Dutch national research school active in the fields of Transport, Infrastructure, and Logistics.

Erasmus Centre for Entrepreneurship is an independent research and education organisation that originated from the Erasmus University, centring around entrepreneurship, both locally and globally.[8]

MGC participates in the top Research School Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics

The University has campuses at five locations, of which four in Rotterdam and one in The Hague:[9]

On 9 September 2009 ("Sustainability Day"), GreenEUR was launched officially. During this day, GreenEUR organized several on-campus activities in cooperation with Greening the Campus. Since April 2010 GreenEUR is officially recognized by the Executive Board.[10]

The economics faculty is, according to the QS World University Rankings 2018, the 9th best in Europe (UK included) and 50th in the world in economics and econometrics,[28] and 37th in the world in accounting and finance (10th best in Europe).[29]
[30]

Times Higher Education World University Rankings ranks Erasmus University 1st in the Netherlands, 7th in Europe and 28th in the world for the subject Economics and Business in 2020.[31]

The Shanghai Jiao Tong University Academic Ranking of World Universities published in 2018, lists Erasmus School of Economics as 9th in Europe and 32nd in the world in the fields of economics and business.[32]

According to US News 2022, Erasmus University Rotterdam ranked 1st in the Netherlands, 2nd in Europe and 10th in the world for Economics and Business.[33]

The Financial Times European Business School Rankings [34] as well as the Global MBA rankings [35] consistently lists RSM as top 10 in Europe. The Financial Times ranked the CEMS MSc in International Management offered by Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University as third in the world in 2022.[36] QS ranked the school's MSc Global Business & Sustainability program among the top 60 in the world in the 2023 International Trade Rankings.[37]

The business school has achieved triple accreditation from the international accrediting bodies of management education; AMBA, EQUIS, and AACSB. Only 100 business schools in the world have acquired triple accreditation, although many schools have a policy of not applying for multiple accreditations.[citation needed]

The Erasmus MC (university medical center) is considered by several major rankings to be a global top institution for clinical medicine, i.e. ranked in the world as 45th in 2020 by Times Higher Education World University Rankings,[38] as 28th in 2020 by U.S. News & World Report Best Global University Ranking[39] and 50th in 2019 by QS World University Rankings.[40]

Furthermore, the Erasmus MC is listed by The Scientist as the fifth-best of the top 15 medical institutions outside the United States (ranking 2004).

Erasmus University Rotterdam offers a broad range of Bachelor's programmes taught in the Dutch language, leading to a B.A., BSc or LL.B. degree

Furthermore, the university offers several completely English-language Bachelor programmes. These programmes are open to students aiming for an international career in Business and/or Economics or Communication and Media. Apart from the Dutch students, at least 50% of the students taking these programmes are international students from over 80 countries.[41]

Students can choose from different types of Master programmes: (common) Master programmes, Research Master programmes or Post-experience Master programmes. Education at this level is given mostly in English.

These type of Master's programmes lead to a M.A., MSc or LL.M. degree.

Talented graduates are given the opportunity to utilise their skills and potential in academic research. To be eligible for a Research Master, a bachelor's or master's degree must have been obtained.

The university also offers specialised knowledge and skills programmes for further development of one's professional career. These types of programmes leads to the commonly known M.A. or MSc, but also to professional master's degree's like MBA, MFM (Master in Financial Management), or MHM:

In addition, most departments, affiliated (research) institutes or faculties offer doctorate programs or positions, leading to the 'Doctor of Philosophy' (PhD) degree. Most of the PhD programs offered by the university are concentrated in several research schools or institutes.

Erasmus University offers special honours programmes.

Students are invited to take part if their first-year grades are well above average and if they have proved themselves to be sufficiently motivated.  The programmes are either disciplinary: special programmes for the very best students of one departments, or interdisciplinary: one of the Erasmus Honours Programme-tracks, where the very best students of the different faculties of the Erasmus University investigate, discuss, and tackle crucial contemporary scientific and societal questions from various perspectives.

After successfully completing the honours-programme, students receive a Honours-certificate and a Letter of Recommendation from the dean of their respective Faculty, or the Rector Magnificus of the EUR.[42]

Heads of government

Business leaders

Economists and researchers

Politicians

Others

51°55′05″N 4°31′33″E﻿ / ﻿51.91806°N 4.52583°E﻿ / 51.91806; 4.52583