

Wageningen University & Research (also known as Wageningen UR; abbreviation: WUR) is a public research university in Wageningen, Netherlands, specializing in life sciences with a focus on agriculture, technical and engineering subjects. It is a globally important center for life sciences and agricultural research. It is located in a region of the Netherlands known as the Food Valley.

WUR consists of Wageningen University and the former agricultural research institutes of the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture. Wageningen University, as a research university, grants degrees at the BSc, MSc and PhD level in life and social sciences. It focuses its research on scientific, social and commercial problems in the field of life sciences and natural resources. It is widely known for its agriculture, forestry, and environmental studies programs. The university has about 12,000 students from over 100 countries. It is a member of the Euroleague for Life Sciences (ELLS) university network.

In 1876 the Rijkslandbouwschool (National Agricultural College) was established in Wageningen. Due to the development of the training to a higher educational level it changed in 1896 to the Hoogere Land- en Boschbouwschool (Agricultural and Forestry College) and in 1904 in Rijks Hoogere Land-, Tuin- en Boschbouwschool (National Agricultural, Horticulture and Forestry College).

In 1918 the school became academic by law (Academic Education Act). The name changed to Rijks Landbouw Hoogeschool (National Agricultural College). The opening date and official start date is 9 March 1918.

In 1986 the "hogescholen" (comparable to scientific institute of technology) were renamed to University in a modification of the Academic Education Act. The new name became Landbouwuniversiteit Wageningen (LUW) (Wageningen Agricultural University (WAU)). The 1986 law changes resulted in the use of the name hogeschool in the Dutch system to be used exclusively for universities of applied science.

Over the years the research and teaching branched out into life sciences in general, while interest for agriculture as a career opportunity waned. In 1997, when the DLO institutes (Dienst Landbouwkundig Onderzoek / Service of agricultural research) merged with the university, the new organisation was rebranded as Wageningen UR (Wageningen University and Research Centre); with the university being renamed Wageningen University. Under Dutch laws the university and the institutes had to remain separate legal entities.

In 2006, the university of applied sciences Van Hall Larenstein became part of Wageningen UR. The idea was to create better collaboration between applied teaching and research at Van Hall and the academic research at Wageningen University. This would also support students to continue with an academic program upon completing their applied degree. However, due to differences in organizational culture and incompatibility of procedures, the collaboration remained problematic. In 2012 it was decided that Van Hall Larenstein would leave Wageningen UR and continue as an independent school once more. In the spring of 2015 the separation was marked by the move of the final Wageningen-based Van Hall Larenstein studies back to Velp.

In 2009 it was decided that the university would consistently use the English name in its communication, and that university research could be presented under the name of the university: Wageningen University (WU), next to the alternative use of the name Wageningen University and Research.[2][3] On 6 September 2016 Wageningen University and the research institutes became one joint brand: Wageningen University & Research (WUR).

On 9 March 2018 Wageningen University celebrated her 100 years anniversary. During this year there were many events and festivities around the campus and in the city of Wageningen.

Wageningen University was the first Dutch university or school that was allowed to use the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS) label. This label is awarded by the European Commission and guarantees the quality of the study program. The university consequently applies this system, thus promoting the mobility of students within Europe and preventing study delay.

The university offers 19 BSc programs[4] (2018-2019). For some BSc programs, the language of instruction is English. Other programs teach in both Dutch and English. The programs start each year in September, last three years, and consist of 180 ECTS credits. The programs are in the field of economy and society, health, life sciences and technology, nature and environment, animals and plants.

Wageningen University offers 36 different MSc programs[5] (2017-2018) and two online masters programs.[6] Although formally the same MSc program, from 2022 onwards the Master of Management Economic and Consumer studies program was offered as 5 independent MSc tracks (Sustainable Business Innovations, Sustainable Supply Chain Analytics, Consumer Studies, Economics of Sustainability, Governance of Sustainability Transformations)[7] The language of instruction for all Master's programs is English. The programs start each year in September, they last two years, and consist of 120 ECTS credits. Most programs offer various specializations and possibilities for majors, as well as full or partial premaster tracks for candidates not fulfilling all entry requirements.

The regular PhD program is a four-year program during which PhD candidates are appointed as junior researcher in the universities, building up unemployment and retirement benefits. Such fully paid PhD candidates on a four year contract can be asked to perform teaching tasks for a maximum of 10% of their time as part of their appointment. Candidates supported by specific grants (usually bestowed upon the candidate by a (international) organisation), or doing PhD next to a regular job can also enrol. In these cases a tailored timeline will be agreed upon. The program consists of a research component (conducting research under supervision and writing a thesis) and a smaller education component (30 ECTS or half a year of course load with conference presentations, and some management and teaching tasks can be listed as learning activity).  [8]

The following research institutes are part of Wageningen Research:

Wageningen University and Research has come under fire due to claims of partiality in research.[21][22] One case regards a research concerning bee colony collapse disorder.[23] Research conducted by Tjeerd Blacquière on the topic has caused controversy due to funding received for the research from the German pesticide producer Bayer,[23] the world's biggest producer of neonicotinoid insecticides, a suspect factor for the colony collapse disorder.[24][25]

In 2018 the Dutch magazine OneWorld went to court in an attempt to demand access to contracts between WUR and Bayer, Syngenta and Monsanto, but OneWorld ultimately lost the court case.[26]

In the field of life sciences, agricultural and environmental science, the university is considered world-class.[38][39][40] According to the Times Higher Education World University Rankings it is the best university in the Netherlands and No. 1 worldwide, in agriculture and forestry for 2017 on the QS World University Rankings charts.[41]

Media related to Wageningen University at Wikimedia Commons

51°58′01.52″N 5°39′30.97″E﻿ / ﻿51.9670889°N 5.6586028°E﻿ / 51.9670889; 5.6586028